# Chapter 7: Time for Reckoning

> ALLENDE: No, this is not a Popular Front, that has to be made quite clear.
>
> DEBRAY: What should one call it then, a Workers' Front?
>
> ALLENDE: A Workers' Front, a Patriotic Front, a Popular Unity, but with a backbone, in which the working class is indisputably the driving force, because although we do not have the hegemony of a single party, the Socialist and Communist parties are undoubtedly the parties which represent 90 percent of the workers---workmen, peasants, office workers, technicians, and professional people...<sup>Régis Debray, *The Chilean Revolution: Conversations with Allende* (New York: Vintage Books, Random House, 1971) p. 123.</sup>

## Labor's Love Lost

It is impossible to know whether Salvador Allende believed this bit of bombast, uttered in the early days of his presidency. The line between reality and political theater in the world of Salvador Allende was always blurred, as it probably would finally become in his own mind.

What is clear is that there never was such a workers' juggernaut, marching shoulder-to-shoulder with him into the brave new world he said he was creating. Indeed, by April of 1973, Allende would confess that labor orneriness had twice pushed him to the extreme of considering resigning, a threat he verbalized during a particularly devastating strike at the nationalized El Teniente mine: "If the workers don't understand the process of change through which we are living, I'll simply go, and then you'll see the consequences." His exasperation exploded a few months earlier in another outburst: "Neither revolutionary consciousness nor morality exists among the workers."<sup>The resignation quote is from *Latin America*, April 27, 1973, vol. 3, no. 17, p. 133; the morality quote from *Ercilla*, January 24, 1973, no. 1958, p. 8. Both are cited in Henry A. Landsberger and Tim McDaniel, "Mobilization As a Double-Edged Sword: The Allende Government's Uneasy Relationship With Labor, 1970--1973," July 1974, in *United States and Chile During the Allende Years, 1970--1973*, Report of the Subcommittee on Inter-American Affairs of the Committe on Foreign Affairs, U.S. House of Representatives, based on Hearings in 1971, 1972, 1973, 1974 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. GPO, 1974), pp. 624--625.</sup>

To begin with, though comparatively well organized by Third World standards, Chilean labor was weak and politically divided. Though the number of workers in unions had doubled during the Frei years as a percentage of the total work force, still the total of workers in unions stood at only 19.4 percent of the labor force when Allende came to the presidency, 22 percent at the end. Chilean unions traditionally had been dominated by the two Marxist parties, the Communists and the Socialists. Their principal bastion was the Central Federation of Workers (CUT, for Confederación Unica de Trabajadores), which, despite its double-speak name, never accounted for more than 60 percent of organized nonagricultural workers. The CUT was a direct descendant of the Chilean Labor Federacion (FOCH, Federación Obrera de Chile) which, in 1921, had become the very first labor federation in the world to join the Moscow-controlled Third Communist International. But by 1973, those two mainstays of the Popular Unity, the Socialists and Communists, were losing ground steadily and dramatically to the Christian Democrats, and not only in non-CUT unions, but in the CUT itself. In June 1972, the 560,000 members of the CUT voted to elect new officers. Despite elaborate efforts to rig the elections, the outcome, when finally announced, sent shock-waves through the Popular Unity coalition The Communists polled 173,088 votes (30.9 percent); the Socialists 148,140 (26.46 percent); the Christian Democrats 147,531 (26.35 percent). Smaller, even more radical parties dominated the remaining 15 percent.<sup>Genaro Arriagada Herrera, *De La 'Via Chilena' a la 'Via Insurreccional,'* (Santiago: Editorial del Pacífico, S.A., 1974), p. 222. Arriagada was one of the leading literary lights of the Christian Democrats---indeed, this book begins with a prologue by Eduardo Frei---and so was privy to the behind-the-scenes details of this crucial combat for control of the unions. In his book, he provides an abundance of detail (pp. 221--224) of the failed machinations to perpetuate government forces in undisputed control of the CUT. He also asserts (p. 220) that, far from demonstrating a newly awakened sense of proletarian power, the proliferation of strikes "seriously hampered" Allende's plans.</sup>

The results were even less cheering for the Popular Unity in elections held in non-CUT unions. According to one usually reliable Chilean publication, the government coalition lost 80 percent of the union elections in 1973. Perhaps no setback on the labor front was more stunning than when, on February 10, 1973, workers at the country's biggest copper mine, Chuquicamata, ended thirty years of Marxist control of their union. That vote came just three weeks after it was reported that the now nationalized mine---the world's biggest open-pit copper mine---had lost money in 1972 for the first time in history. And it also came after a long period of verbal flogging of the mineworkers by Allende---who demonstrated, as he did, that he was the workers' champion only so long as the workers toed his line.

There was one other area in which the Allende government showed that, while it would claim to speak for workers, it was less prepared to listen to them: the campaign of nationalization of the companies which gave those workers their livelihoods. As one government labor leader put it: "We will not accept plebiscites. Nationalization will go forward---period." In almost every case, the "vote" whether to go from private to state ownership was done by acclamation, show of hands or open ballot. Only once did the government accept the outcome of a secret ballot: at the large appliance manufacturer MADEMSA, where 925 workers voted for nationalization, 725 against.<sup>In the balloting on February 10, the opposition (mainly the Christian Democrats) won 7 of 10 seats on the union board, prompting the regional CUT secretary-general to brand the event as an "historic" defeat for his forces. Chuquicamata's 1972 losses---the first full year of government control---were put at $5 million by Christian Democrat Senator Juan de Dios Carmona, in a January 23 statement. *Breve Historia de la Unidad Popular* (Santiago: Editorial Lord Cochrane, S.A., 1974), Teresa Donoso L., ed., a chronology of key dates and events during the Allende years, 1970--1973, taken from the pages of *El Mercurio* and compiled by that newspaper, pp. 294, 286. The reference to government losses in non-CUT unions is in Landsberger and McDaniel, in *United States and Chile*, op. cit., p. 627. The assertion, which they remark "remains to be substantiated," appears in *Ercilla*. They also cite (p. 624) several examples of Allende's criticism of mineworkers. When Chuqui workers struck for a 70 percent wage increase a few weeks after his election, Allende denounced them as "a labor aristocracy." A year later, they report, during a visit to Chuqui, Allende "complained bitterly" of losses caused by unauthorized strikes. As an example of what he branded as "stealing," Allende said mineworkers demanded "60 days' wages for a job that took 20 days, left 30 minutes early at the end of a shift and arrived 15 minutes late."</sup> 

What is also clear is that the Allende years saw labor strife at levels never before witnessed in the country. The authors of a careful and restrained examination of the labor picture during the Allende years arrived at this conclusion: "Instead of support, the government received as many or more blows as it did support from the sector most friendly to it."<sup>Ibid., p. 620.</sup> That sector was, of course, labor---in whose name Allende claimed to speak, to govern.

As shortages mounted, Patricio Palma, director of the government's Directorate of Industry and Commerce (DIRINCO), told his Communist party comrades at a party strategy session, October 2, 1972: "In every house of the grand bourgeoisie, there toils at least one comrade who knows the life and secrets of the masters of the house, and these comrades come from a working- or peasant-class background ... DIRINCO is in touch with these comrades and we are studying the concrete steps so that they can work with us in exposing those who have transformed their private storerooms into clandestine storerooms..."<sup>*Breve Historia*, op. cit., p. 227.</sup>

----

It began disarmingly, early in that month of October, in the sparsely populated province of Aisén, a region of spectacular fjords and rugged islands almost too numerous to count, not much closer to Santiago (1,500 miles) than it is to the outstretched tip of Antarctica. Alarmed about reports that the government planned to establish a state trucking agency, the union of truck owners---made up almost entirely of owners of one or two trucks---went on strike in Aisén. Before it would end, a month later, that handful of truckers would be joined by hundreds ot thousands of others, from shopkeepers to airline pilots, peasants to professors: 45 unions, including 400,000 peasants, 120,000 shopkeepers, 50,000 students. Hundreds of union leaders, truckers and workers would be jailed, radio stations seized by the government, others ordered off the air, trucks and small businesses "requisitioned," and martial law proclaimed in Santiago and a state of emergency in twelve of the country's twenty-five other provinces (which put virtually the entire population under military rule). The cost to an already sagging economy was put at $150--200 million, but, because the strike hit at the peak of the harvest season, the impact was even greater. The government at first attempted to crush it with force: Allende blustered that any shopkeeper who failed to open his doors within twenty-four hours would be deported, and DIRINCO Director Patricio Palma personally led police squads ordered to batter down shop doors and protective metal curtains, triggering a number of violent clashes. It was October 25 before Allende would agree to his first meeting with the strike leaders.

Viewing the violence, viewing the anger, former President Gabriel González Videla, a Radical, said: "The suffering and heroic middle class today impoverished, humiliated, anguished, has brought strength out of weakness and gone from words to action as a last resort to make the
